have you ever unwrapped a present  maybe the person who gave you the  president is in the room with you maybe  not  and  as soon as you get the wrapping paper  off you see right away oh wow this is  some kind of really impressive artistic  box  it could be carved at a wood could be  made out of metal whatever it is  and then your mind starts racing you're  looking at this beautiful box it was  underneath the wrapping paper and you  wonder what could be inside you know it  may be a handmade box that may be  produced in a factory but there's this  highly decorative box and you know  you know most packages you get a hint at  you know what's what's going to be  inside once you take the lid off and  then you take the lid off the box  and there's nothing inside  because the present  is the box now if the person who gave it  to you is sitting right there with you  you know on christmas or hanukkah or  whatever you celebrate you know they  might say oh yeah yeah it's a decorative  box so i gave it to you you can  can keep your socks in it keep anything  you want you know oh oh right the  present is the box you're not  necessarily  disappointed you're not mad at the  person or something it's just this  moment of being slightly out of step  with expectations like oh oh okay right  all right so the the gift is the box the  it's not that the box contains the gift  people want to take this attitude toward  their own cultural heritage especially  christmas  people in the united states of america  in western europe especially they want  to kid themselves into thinking that  they can keep the packaging they can  keep the container  that christmas  you know it's just this beautiful  decorative  empty box and you can fill it up with  anything you like that you know  christmas can be a secular holiday that  christmas can be an atheist holiday it  can represent anything you want it to  represent  if you're american specifically people  try to do this with thanksgiving like oh  it's such a nice box  slavery genocide the puritans wiping out  the indigenous people the the indians in  this particular uh part of the east  eastern seaboard the united states oh  we'll keep the box you know and um we'll  fill it up with all kinds of good things  we'll give it all kinds of nice ideas  we'll say it's a holiday celebrating you  know  some uh ideology more suited to our  times more suited to our tastes so on  and so forth  [Laughter]  this is a box  that cuts part of your dick off okay  how what percentage  of christian males in the united states  of america are circumcised and yes when  i talk to christians face to face when i  talk to jewish people face to face i go  right to the most disturbing example the  example that is the most irrevocable the  most impossible to change or compensate  for or wiggle your way out of with  jesuitical reasoning you know uh a  decision that's made by your parents on  your behalf while you're still an infant  and you can't speak for yourself and no  one represents your rights or your  long-term interests something that is as  unspeakable as tattooing the word jew on  a baby's face  right but instead you're depriving them  of 60 of the nerve endings in their  penis for the rest of their life  right and christians do this as if  they're tattooing the word christian on  a baby's face all right now i i'm  someone who both is jewish  and looks jewish there's a real sense in  which i walk around with jew tattooed on  my face and i am the target of  anti-semitism not just on the internet  in real life i i i don't just identify  as jewish everyone else identifies me as  jewish and i gotta deal with that  all right  gotta tell you i remember the first time  ever i confronted my father about his  decision to have me circumcised because  both of my parents are they they  consider themselves atheists whether or  not that's really true is kind of  another story there are people who call  themselves atheists who aren't in the  same way their people call themselves  christians who aren't i mean life's full  of these kinds of uh these paradoxes and  you know the way my father reacted it  was completely sincere and unguarded  you'd think you were asking him  why he chose the color blue when he  bought his first car as a teenager you  know what i mean like it wasn't so much  something he was making excuses for  justifying it was just this distant  memory he didn't really care about and  where he was just kind of speculating  like oh why did i choose a blue car i  mean i don't know maybe i was thinking  this maybe i was thinking that you know  when someone  they're not like making up an answer to  try to please you or try to mislead you  they're making up an answer because they  just don't give a [ __ ] and they never  gave a [ __ ] it never mattered to them it  doesn't matter to them now and she's  like yeah i mean you know on the one  hand maybe it was this they were  thinking oh well guess what i get to  deal with the consequences  for  ever  but of course circumcision isn't the  only example all right christianity  judaism  islam  communism  fascism  do you think that all of these  ideologies should be allowed to open and  operate their own schools for children  do you think they should all be allowed  to open and operate their own summer  camps  now in case you think small cult groups  don't do this they do i mean the mormons  are a large cult group scientology  medium-sized cult group i mean examples  of that if you listen to hip-hop music  if you listen to rap music you may be  aware of the the so-called uh  five percenter  religion all right there are a lot of  rap lyrics from wu-tang clan uh puff  daddy a lot a lot of new york rappers or  greater new york area rappers have a lot  of five percent illusions a lot of five  percent mythology or philosophy whatever  to say in their in their rap song  if you look up the history of that  movement the real turning point was when  they started to get funding to open and  operate their own school now i forget  how many years this school operated i  don't think it lasted for all that long  but they were taking in children and uh  always remember that the emphasis in on  their in their school i mean to some  extent it was about kind of black  self-empowerment there were some other  other themes going on there but um  they emphasized mathematics  and self-defense  i was thought no you know to what extent  that was them using code words for what  they were really teaching uh i don't  know but i remember thinking yeah i can  kind of imagine you grew up in the  african-american ghetto and you think  you know what if there are two things  kids are not learning enough of in  schools and regular government schools  mathematics and self-defense  if you guys know anything about even the  hip-hop hip-hop slang that comes out of  that out of that religious movement they  do use the word mathematics in a way  that you and i do not it is it is a bit  of a code word but in any case i think  they use self-defense in a way that we  don't use it also but uh oh okay so you  know if we're if we're moving past  the level of just acknowledging  irrevocable permanent  bodily harm done by these religions  changing people's lives forever  a few moments after they're born marking  them  physically and impairing them physically  for the rest of the last men and women  you can google it right now how many  million women are circumcised and will  have female genital mutilation whatever  you want to call it how many million men  are circumcised how many of them don't  know why  their parents didn't know why right  they're just trapped in this cultural  pattern that goes on and on forever okay  do you think it's harmless to put a  child into catholic school if so you're  not an atheist all right you're not  all right there are atheists who will  say that and you know there's a sense in  which i kind of don't believe them but  if you talk to them at some length and  they're really sincere they really think  it does no harm to a child to be sat  down and taught how to pray  taught how to confess to a priest taught  not just how to do the rituals but  you're taught what they mean what they  symbolize what your place in the  universe is you're taught whatever the  hell you're taught these days about the  theory of evolution that's changed for  the catholic church it's not the same  for the catholics is it this is the  protestants anymore you taught whatever  you're taught about human sexuality and  marriage and all these other things all  right well i don't think that's harmless  i think people  are damaged for  life  and even if it's harder to see than the  damage done by circumcision  all right  if you look closely enough you can see  it  even amongst the people who consciously  and intentionally reject catholicism and  start to identify as atheists or as  anti-clerical people who were church  they are [ __ ] up  for  life  i don't have time to read this book i  may never  have time to read this book this is a  somewhat famous person called uh tom  baker i after i ordered this book i just  googled around to see  what people say about the saturday this  is now the 2022  coming up in the last few days 2021.  and this is someone who was tremendously  famous in the decade of the 1980s i  remember someone online uh so just  googled around to see what what people  were saying about him i think i did  within the last year or something but  because again he's not forgotten but  he's become  barely remembered barely known cultural  icon i remember somebody saying you know  that for him growing up as a child in  the 1980s  that tom baker really symbolized what it  meant to be a man he was a symbol  of adult masculinity  that was sort of intellectual and  responsible he was a hero  but he wasn't a physically dominant hero  in the way arnold schwarzenegger was you  know in the way an action movie hero was  it's not he didn't use a gun he didn't  take his shirt off he didn't punch  people out with his tremendous muscles  he wasn't a kung fu hero  uh for a lot of kids growing up at the  time i think so this was just a comment  i read from one person up i thought  wow that must be true for a lot of kids  who grew up in that era and his show he  was the star of doctor who  and he was the star of that show at a  turning point where it went from being a  somewhat obscure cult  uh subculture to being really a big  mainstream hit show certainly in the  united states of america uh if you want  to talk about within england or within  western europe i'm sure the timeline is  a little bit different but what i  remember is when his version of the show  came out his several seasons that's when  mainstream networks went back and looked  again at the earlier seasons of the show  and said okay how can we make money out  of this  um i think if if you grew up within  england you'd have a more complex memory  of from one year to the next how the  show became more or less famous the tide  rose and phil it was it was a big  turning point now look i'm not i'm now a  43 year old man i'm not here saying that  this show had a lot of intellectual  content by by my standards i'm saying if  you were an eight-year-old kid a  ten-year-old kid a 12 year old kid  watching this show it had a lot of  intellectual substance compared to  teenage mutant ninja turtles compared to  arnold schwarzenegger movies cop drama  movies you know tj hooker compared to  macgyver there's the cultural reference  melissa's not really old enough to  remember macgyver it's not really her  generation nor am i yeah anyway i'm not  i'm not quite old enough for from  macgyver  even my older sister i think would would  be more of a macgyver person i mean a  generationally  so yeah compared to the other stuff on  tv who he was and what he seemed to  represent in the character he played and  as he said at the time he still says now  he was given no direction on how to play  the character like how does he portray  this fictional character how does he  play the part of doctor who what he was  told with the director was just be tom  baker just be yourself so he felt that  there was a lot of himself in the  in the character all right  why  did i buy  this book  i don't give a [ __ ] about doctor who tom  baker is a fascinating example of  someone  who was completely broken  by the christian religion  and he stayed broken his whole life long  there was no putting the pieces back  together not even after he rejected the  religion not even after he became an  atheist or not even after he rebelled  against the religion put it that way not  even after he became  a multi-millionaire movie star whatever  i want to say became a tremendously  successful cultural icon due to his uh  due to his position on a mainstream tv  show when he was a young man he was a  true believer and i he went to a  monastery i forget to what extent he was  in seminary to become a monk or to what  extent to become a priest and  again i haven't read the book i haven't  had time who knows what i'll have time  if ever you know but this is the life  story of a man who was broken by  religion by being inculcated with  religious education at an early age and  he stayed broken and this book tries and  i have read enough of it though it tries  to be really honest about the effects on  his sexuality right what you're getting  when i say you never get over it it  doesn't mean you stay living in celibacy  your whole life right a lot of people  rebel against it and they go the other  way they overcompensate but they still  don't really understand sexuality  they're just acting out their rage and a  comprehension of what was inculcated in  a different way tries to be honest about  his sexuality you know as a as a child  as a teenager as a as an adult how he  struggled with this through the lens of  religion against the laws of religion  right and it tries to be  honest about  nationalism too  national identity all if you if you  watch the news it seems so easy for us  to look at palestinians to look at  iranians  iraqis whatever look at the isis  rebellion look down and say ah these  these poor benighted petty people who  somehow mix together religion and  politics for them their faith is you  know  [Music]  inextricably bound up with  nationalism  how about irish people  about scottish people how about english  people how about southern baptists in  the united states of america you think  religion isn't  inextricably bound up with nationalism  for us to whoever the [ __ ] you are in  the world you you think  you know we talk about the japanese we  talk about south koreans we don't really  talk about italians the french  really like take a step back  look at detachment with christianity and  you're going to see that we really do  have the same fundamental problems as  islam the most important reason  to engage in the critique of islam is  not because it is so different from  christianity but because they are so  nearly the same they're so  closely comparable  um  if you can get to the point of admitting  to yourself that it's not just  circumcision  that the problem is  little kids like tom baker being put  into religious  schools uh  what next  what now like already just with those  just with those realizations just with  admitting that to yourself the political  path we have in front of us is very  clear now i'll digress for half a second  i'll um see your comments coming guys if  you have a second hit the thumbs up  button it'd be nice to have more people  join and  comment while i'm doing this but  obviously i have enough i can do this as  a straight monologue and melissa can  join at any time too i'm not going to  lean on the comments to provide me with  with content here you know  but  when you're dealing with people face to  face and this may be your own parents it  may be your grandparents and maybe  friends you've known since school  it may be people who identify as  atheists or even people who identify as  atheist activists who are horrified by  your honesty when it comes to actually  destroying  the christian church we actually talk  about destroying religion destroying  these institutions permanently you know  actually talking about abolition  of  circumcision actually talking about  abolition of religious childhood  education you know  that's when it's really useful to  point out the parallels between  christianity and islam  christianity and whatever the worst cult  is that they're afraid of that's  actually you know alive and operating  like oh oh so you think it's no problem  to take a little kid and put them into a  catholic school you think that's no  problem at all well how do you think  about muslim kids in madrasas how does  that look what if it's your kid what if  we take your kid and we put them into  the same school in palestine you know in  israel's occupied territories you want  to say  how about we put them into a school  operated by hamas how about we put them  into a school  operated by  isis you know these things really exist  how about they go into the regular  school system even right now in turkey  you'd be shocked at how cr this is a big  issue in turkey is um the current prime  minister of uh  turkey has been encouraging more and  more people to be in the religious  school system the revival of religious  as opposed to secular journey but they  have both you know i show you taking  more money how what do you think about  the you know the school system in saudi  arabia you know  you think there aren't neo-nazis who  want to run their own school  really like  in the old days i could just say try  google or try looking around youtube now  this stuff is all so censored you're  gonna have to go to some other websites  you're gonna have to go to you know the  dark web or something you're gonna go to  sensor we go websites that are outside  of the censorship system because it's  now harder and harder to see you know  you think there aren't people who want  to raise their kids in a neo-nazi school  i think most of them right now are doing  homeschooling but if that doesn't  already exist  it will do you think there aren't  communists like within the united states  of america not even talking about china  or russia who want to give their kids a  hardcore communist upbringing  and you know  one of the great advantages of the era  of the internet is that you get to  really see and hear  the reality of these things  if i just tell you to imagine in the  abstract what a christian summer camp is  like you know yeah maybe it seems  laughable it seems like a joke when you  are watching the youtube videos that are  made  by the christian summer camps themselves  this is not an expose it's not like a  critic of christianity  suggesting that we should abolish these  summer camps you're looking at  promotional videos made by christians  themselves made by the owners of the  summer camps themselves to invite new  students just look at that and it's so  damning and it's so horrifying and for  me at least i can say it is disturbing  and upsetting to see the reality of what  they're doing with these kids and you  know i'm i'm only looking at the  christian summer camps that are in  english you know i'm looking at the  english language i'm sure it gets worse  you can look at the equivalent for islam  you can look at the equivalent for  scientology you can look at the  equivalent for mormonism all right and  now ask yourself  what  happens  next  in the united states of america and by  the way we don't have to exclusively  talk about uh we can talk about japan we  talk about taiwan we talk about the  whole world  oh i could tell some stories about  religious schools in taiwan  um  uh the united states of america  has been on a very strange  path  in the philosophy of education and the  politics of education and questioning  what should be the government's role in  education in the  constitution the united states itself  not one word no during the period of  time when they were negotiating and  writing the constitution the federal  constitution united states america not a  single thought given to it uh within the  same generation though just a couple  generations later by contrast look at  the constitution for the state of maine  so that's m-a-i-n-e if you're not  american if you look at the  constitutional state of maine then you  search for words like education and  school i forget the exact wording  whoa what a difference you can tell that  in those few decades since you know the  revolution ended the federal government  form  almost immediately and over the course  of just a few decades within one  lifetime  the issue the question of what will be  the government's role what will be the  government's responsibility in education  it grew and grew until we get into  what's called the progressive era  and interestingly  during the progressive era that was  actually a period where the right wing  and the left wing of the time  they found common cause because the  conservatives even though you might  think they would be opposed to  government's role in education  government-controlled uh education that  you might think the right-winger  concerns the time would be defending the  uh power of the church to uh provide and  control education  conservatives  on the contrary and religious  conservatives who had they still have a  lot of money now they had a lot of money  and control and influence then they were  convinced  that government funding of education and  government control of education would  result in the moral upliftment of the  working class and they were aware that  the working class and just poor people  people were completely penniless they  didn't have access to the elite  education offered by christian schools  most of them had access to no education  at all so that okay for the moral uplift  of the poor the left and the right so to  speak were united in supporting the  first steps taken towards  standardization and government provision  of education so this  this has emerged in the united states in  this sort of unplanned way very much  outside of the constitutional framework  nobody in america knows what the role of  government is supposed to be in  education there is a debate which i saw  myself here on youtube  between  nixon  and jfk between richard nixon and john  kennedy  and uh  the way they talk about government's  role in education it's completely  surreal  it's just mind-blowing that at that time  this was still a totally open question  like you think we were still this was  still during the  signing of the american constitution so  i'm in this totally open-minded  hypothetical way what role do you think  government should have if any  to what extent should education just  remain the domain of donors and you know  at that time it's completely dominated  by the christian church now within the  last few decades  the  [Laughter]  the library shelf for philosophy of  education is bare guys there's just so  few books worth reading from the last  century in terms of philosophy of  education but  the political debate about education in  the united states of america has been  dominated by the libertarians  and if you don't know what i mean by  libertarian they are basically the  polite version of  anarcho-capitalists that's what i work  specifically right-wing enterprise so  there are some left-wing capitalists  completely laughable political ideology  okay there was the libertarian agenda in  education and then there were basically  various disorganized attempts to fight  against or struggle against the  libertarian i'll say a few words with  that in a second now i do think we  probably have some germans in in the  audience right now  my youtube channel is a lot more  successful in germany than it is in  canada and i think that reflects that  germany has a higher level of education  in case you haven't noticed i don't  livestream at german but  it is fair to say that in germany the  memory of world war ii the memory of the  holocaust the awareness  that they were in the process of a  tightly controlled  government transition from fascism to  capitalist democracy right  i i think that really you know produced  a very different culture of education  very different set of uh fundamental  presuppositions about what the role of  government in public education is  and i mean everyone there knew like you  had a generation where  every single student in your class  either their father had been a nancy or  their grandfather or both like everyone  had at least one grandparent who was a  nazi so how are you going to raise that  next generation  to not become neo-nazis to not repeat  you know the ideologies  i'm not saying 100 of germans  leaned that way politically just saying  this was a massive challenge right oh  and in case because you had heard there  was this thing called communism right  the other thing the other reason for the  german government to have a kind of  choke hold on public education to  control it very tightly was okay we want  to steer you away from fascism we want  to steer you away from the right wing  but we don't want to steer you too far  to the left  if you keep going then you start  sympathizing with east germany you start  sympathizing with joseph stalin you  start sympathizing with the eastern bloc  and you know to say it was a cold war uh  is really another statement if you had  been in germany at that time it was it  was a very intense ongoing struggle so  those are political circumstances within  the last 100 years that i do think  fostered a very different uh philosophy  education  culture of education in germany  guess what guys  it's not enough  if you in case you think germany is the  great homeland of like secular  scientific modern attitudes in case you  think germany is the graveyard of the  catholic religion or is the graveyard of  the protestant religion look again it's  not all those institutions are thriving  germans are still incredibly [ __ ] up  by christianity like you know i think a  great comparison within europe  be to look at education in germany look  at education in ireland right they're  both [ __ ] up i mean they're both  [ __ ] up by religion but ireland did  not go through any of those challenges  and they weren't worried about  fascism and reverting to nazis whatever  they weren't as worried about communism  communism wasn't an immediate threat in  ireland that way and you know don't get  me wrong the government did have a very  heavy hand uh in basically forming a new  national ideology in ireland the role of  the gaelic language there were different  things you could see pushing and pulling  at uh  national education uh government-funded  education ireland but it's nothing  compared to the struggle uh germany was  in the midst of in the in the long  20th century shall we say all right but  my point is here just to say  as  muscular and decisive  as government  intervention in education  is in the german context in the german  example it is still not remotely  adequate to snuffing out the influence  of the church  i'm saying the church just to generalize  catholicism protestantism christianity  of varys kinds in germany lutheranism  right all of these religions that were  in so many ways utterly discredited by  the 20th century and by the nazi  experience in specific guess what guys  they've been revived so i've mentioned  this before one of my employers in the  past a guy who was my boss uh in the  past he had been a small child during  the nazi periods he was a very old man  when i knew him  and uh but you know the period of  reconstruction after the end of world  war ii he had more mature memories of  that you know but during the war itself  he'd been a small child uh but the  immediate aftermath he remembered very  well or with more complexity put it that  way his childhood memories of the nasty  period were simplistic shall we say but  he did have some anyway uh  i remember he said to me it was it was a  big deal to him for like he said this he  said you know um  there are a lot of things you can't  learn  from archaeology  you know the reality of what's going on  politically or culturally he said if a  thousand years from now if  archaeologists dig up the remains of  what happened in germany in the 20th  century  they will see after  the nazi period we were building  churches everywhere  they were building new churches they  were rebuilding  old churches that had been destroyed by  the bombing and they were renovating and  restoring old churches that had just  become dilapidated through the process  of time were now valued as as cultural  heritage he said you know anyone looking  at those kinds of archaeological remains  they would think this was a period of  intense  you know  intense christian faith of christian  revival  and he said i lived through that period  and let me tell you  there never was a more nihilistic  never was a more atheistic period in the  history of germany everyone was  completely disillusioned with the church  if anything we all hated and resented  christianity and they all knew  they all knew the sense in which not  just the church as an abstract uh  institution or abstract concept not just  the sense of which the church had been  attached to  the nazi party they knew how their  particular priest their particular  pastor their particular preacher they  knew the individual people  inside their church in their city or  their town they knew what they did  during the horror and of course in many  cases  uh not only was their resentment but  their their role in nazism their role in  anti-semitism the ruling the fad  ideologies and crazy pseudoscience of  the day and the reform of christianity  itself by the way carried out by the  nazi party so that's much forgotten  though uh so-called positive  christianity adolf hitler's reforms to  the christian religion during his life  um  a lot of people died  no matter which side they were fighting  on and the war was like  yeah you piece of [ __ ] you were an  able-bodied man and you were here in  this pulpit preaching you were here in  this lutheran church preaching instead  of being out there on the front lines  where my brother died or my father died  at my like where a whole bunch of us  died  you had it you were real comfortable  here in the church  saying this [ __ ] that now nobody  believes in you know you were a  conformist to the worst worst kind okay  but here's the problem so you just say  this is just a totally human reflection  and feeling from my former boss who  lives through that that period okay the  problem is  in allowing the infrastructure of the  church to be rebuilt instead of burning  it down instead of tearing it down  forever instead of decisively deciding  yeah you know what the history of  lutheranism  ends with the nazi period and now it's  over  you could you know you have much ground  to abolish the  lutheran church as the nazi party and  really they were the same thing guys  during the third fight they were one in  the same organization they really were i  mean especially lutheranism within  germany you know look at the history of  what happened  you know you could you could have at  that time draw a line in the sand and  say you know i know obviously i'm not  proposing that would have completely  extinguished religion but okay if  christianity is going to exist it is  going to be some kind of completely new  completely disestablished form of  christianity that doesn't have churches  and doesn't control schools doesn't  control universities where it is  stripped  of its worldly power and it doesn't  collect taxes and it doesn't collect  tides and it doesn't get benefits from  the government and taxpayers money are  not used to build its architecture to  build its monuments or restore its  grounds like you know we're tearing it  down and it's going to stay  okay well guess what it's not what  germany did  no matter how nihilistic they were at  the time you know for let's say 10 years  or something after the end of that  spirit they allowed the infrastructure  of the church to be rebuilt and in so  doing they locked themselves into  another century of the [ __ ] dark ages  it's not getting better it's getting  worse  vladimir putin  in russia oh suddenly everything i just  said about germany it seems a lot easier  to [ __ ] admit to ourselves when it's  russia doesn't it  what what happened in russia under  communism yeah the christian church was  suppressed you can say it really wasn't  eliminated you can talk to people who  lived through that period of russia  people were discouraged from going to  church but under russian communism the  church didn't cease to exist one of many  paradoxes i mean also by the way in case  you didn't know  when the russian communist party was  founded one of the most fundamental  promises was that everyone would get the  same salary like to eliminate wage  inequality like everyone would get you'd  have a minimum wage and a maximum wage  wage the minimum wage would be fifty  dollars the maximum energy fifty dollars  everyone's got the same  yeah they never even attempted it's one  of those promises campaign promises this  bird you know i don't know total  economic inequality and they say  strangely the early promises about  abolition of religion they really just  never followed through on them but  nevertheless under russian communism you  certainly had a powerful  deterrent  to the christian faith what happened  after the berlin wall  fell what happened after that fateful  day  in 1991 as i recall december of 1991  when for the last time the red flag was  lowered over the russian house of  parliament over all the russian  government buildings in moscow  simultaneously and instead they put up  the old imperial tri-color they restored  the  pre-communist flag but for the last time  the hammer and sickle came down never to  fly again what  happened you didn't destroy the church  when you had the chance  you allowed it to be rebuilt you even  funded it and fostered it and pretended  it was just cultural heritage you  pretended that it was just an empty box  this beautifully carved empty box who  wants to get rid of it it has this  wonderful quality of decorative art oh  it's only an empty box you can put  anything inside you can put the most  modern humanitarian sentiments inside  the most refined 21st century  relativistic ideology can go inside oh  don't dolter out the box just because it  used to have something bad inside it  doesn't mean it always has to you can  reuse the box you can reuse the  packaging  what do you [ __ ] think is gonna  happen  in the next hundred years  in russia  given what happened in the last hundred  years you think  the russian orthodox church is getting  less powerful  it's not it's terrifying how much money  and power the russian orthodox church  has now it's terrifying how much land  they own okay  and they have schools and they have  universities and they employ people  they're like a separate organized crime  institution within russia that is  unbelievably powerful and  i can say it's not going to change i'm  i'm telling you i think it's going to  get worse  it's they're going to get more and more  powerful  it's going to get worse  before it gets better and you can  speculate about to what extent the  politicians of vladimir putin's  generation  to what extent they did this just out of  laziness like they just didn't have a  strong filthy to what extent they did it  out of a sense of nationalism like  rather than religion feeling that a part  of russian-ness was caught up in the  eastern orthodox church again in that  box  in that architecture in that music in  those decorative elements and you know  to what extent  people really sincerely had a crisis of  faith i remember it being debated this  is right around 1989 1991 i remember it  being debated whether or not the russian  government should now censor television  more because there were these  charismatic christian leaders  spiritualists new age hippie leaders who  were getting on tv  and you know it looked like a pyramid  scam but you know they were they were  making a lot of money you were asking  for donations asking for investments  they were mixing religion and  fundraising and so on and at that time  it seemed like enormous numbers of  russians were so eager for it you know  after being starved of organized  religion under communism there were huge  numbers of them who stepped up and  embraced it but by the way there were  plenty of people especially when you  read uh specific biographies or  autobiographies of people you will be  amazed how many people just  continued practicing their their  particular form of religion throughout  the whole communist period well you know  for for decades and uh  they weren't persecuted more or less  than anyone else i mean life was  miserable in russia for everyone life  was miserable for communist party cadres  don't get me wrong  so that's easy to admit to ourselves  right it's easy to look at russia  vladimir putin's russia our hated enemy  in 2021 right oh  they [ __ ] up  oh they had this opportunity  to break with the church forever  to embrace modern secular scientific  anti-religious anti-clerical values to  to stamp out  religious education for the next  generation of kids you know to have the  kind of decisive shift that germany had  in some ways after the nazi period and  it said look your father may have been a  nancy your grandfather may have been a  nancy but not you  oh  it's going to be different for you it's  going to be different for your  generation that was wrong this is right  we're moving on you know to have that  kind of really clear  turning point in history and guess what  guys it involves coercion  in germany it's illegal to be a nazi the  law is not enforced terribly strictly  you can google right now and see there  were there are whole towns full of nazis  in germany there are people getting away  with it but everyone gets the signal  this is something that is actually  forbidden this is something in the past  and we are coercively going to  communicate to everyone that it must  remain  uh in the past  it's easy for us to look at  vladimir putin's russia  say oh boy what what a lost opportunity  you know and now now here instead  anyone have any optimism about the next  hundred years in russia does anyone  think the power of the church is going  to diminish or disappear let's let's  just calibrate it  20 years from now i hope everyone here  is still going to be alive 20 years from  now 20 years from now  who is going to be more religious  the russians  or the italians  the ukrainians  or the spanish  right  i'm just being with you i think eastern  europe 20 years from now is going to be  more [ __ ] up by religion than italy  italy is somewhat [ __ ] up but don't  get me wrong don't like i don't know on  a scale of one to ten it's difficult to  assign numbers these would be difficult  to calibrate it try to come up with a  scale of harm done by christianity in  any one of these kind of oh yeah oh yeah  russians questions are [ __ ] up by  christian and it's  it's not getting better guys  it's not  [Laughter]  and on the other hand  isn't it hard to sympathize with china  isn't it hard to sympathize with the  horrible government of evil xi jinping  when they put the foot down and say  islam  is  over  no  more madrasas  no more  religious education literally  no more telling people not to eat pork i  know that may seem like a joke to you  guys i mean i'm i'm vegan i don't eat  pork also don't eat cows but yeah i you  know i do believe the stories about the  communist party going and force people  to eat pork and it very directly mirrors  their decades-long history of forcing  buddhists to meet generally people who  were committed buddhists  including the former emperor at the time  of the revolution of somewhat  sadistically forcing them to be  non-vegetarian as part of breaking down  their faith breaking down their their  sense of religious identity so this  consistent recurring motif in the coming  spread it would not surprise me at all  it's possible it's propaganda it's  possible but it would not surprise me at  all if they are sitting down with  muslims and saying no you're going to  learn that there's nothing magical about  this meat it doesn't even taste that  different from other kinds of meat  you're going to sit down and eat pork  like everyone else in china you're going  to start living in the modern world and  stop having  superstitious beliefs  monstrous oh terrible unforgivable oh oh  all of a sudden i care so much about  human rights do you give a [ __ ] about  human rights in north korea do you give  a [ __ ] about human rights in communist  china something give a [ __ ] that nobody  in china can vote you give a [ __ ] about  human rights in myanmar in cuba i mean  in saudi arabia oh no no no no no no no  no in this in this very specific context  of religious freedom in one province of  china i care about human rights how  about buddhists in tibet no interest no  you know  no no no oh you you care about human  rights i don't  i don't think  human beings should live for the next  century  in a museum  devoted to the worst [ __ ] errors of  their past  i don't think the 22nd century should be  a [ __ ] museum to what we believed in  the 14th century  where we lock ourselves into a goddamn  gilded cage  a gleaming display case with our  accumulated cultural heritage oh look at  this vaz it's so [ __ ] pretty  look at my ming vods  look look at this this fine tapestry  look at this handy work look at all the  things we did  devoted to these vulgar idiotic cult  beliefs look at all the paintings we  have of angels  look at look at all the paintings we  have a baby jesus we're so [ __ ] proud  fill up your [ __ ] house with it fill  up your life with it inculcate your  children with this ideology for no  goddamn reason other than the fact that  your great-grandparents did  repeat it forever and ever even down to  an including what involves cutting off  part of your penis what involves losing  60 of the nerve endings in your penis  and i've read the bible there is no  justification there's no great symbolic  meaning to it you can read the bible  cover to cover asking yourself why and  there is no answer to the question why  it's the mark of the covenant of abraham  cutting off part of your dick that's how  barbaric these beliefs are there's  nothing beautiful about it  doesn't even compare well  to the poetry of william shakespeare and  i'm a critic of shakespeare i think more  than half of his writing is garbage more  than half of his plays are garbage i  don't particularly like his sonnets okay  i'm not really an uncritical fan of  shakespeare but okay if you've got  complete works of william shakespeare  and you've got the christian bible which  one do you want to take to a desert  island and which one which one do you  want recited at your funeral blah blah  blah there's some value in some  of shakespeare's work want to cut off  your dick for it huh you want to get a  [ __ ] circumcision to symbolize your  commitment to the brilliance and genius  of [ __ ] william shakespeare  all right  the future of atheism cannot be  tolerance for religion because in case  you haven't heard one religion doesn't  have tolerance for us two  each religion has nothing but  intolerance for all of the other [ __ ]  religions do you think it's harmless to  send your kid to a sunni summer camp you  think it's harmless to send your kid to  be raised in a shiite muslim  fundamentalist school i'll tell you one  thing i want you have two kids  raise one of them suny and one of them  shiites so they [ __ ] hate each other  how does that sound  right  the only reason why we can see this so  clearly is the the otherness of islam  okay it's that it's remote enough it's  alien enough for us that we can perceive  in islam the same [ __ ] problems that  are there with judaism and christianity  they're just more familiar  gonna take a moment to read thomas the  audience melissa if you'd like to join  in  [Laughter]  for reasons i was looking up  videos lately of christmas music  uh for critical reasons  i'm writing something about christmas  so i saw a  family that i'd posted  music videos of themselves with their  children their  six-year-old daughter was singing these  christmas songs  um and just to me  it hit you know it's exactly what you've  been saying like i really don't think  this is  good for children and uh i do see the  real harm and in my family having seen  how  different people different personality  types different characteristics and  cousins and distant cousins how they've  responded once they grow up once they  get out of the christian uh household  they respond you know  um  one of my relatives or one of my distant  relatives has become a homeless drug  addict basically and i know it's because  he was messed up because of christianity  going to not a religious summer camp but  basically a boot camp to  you know become  what more well-behaved  um you know  it's just i have seen plenty of these  examples of children growing up  and being screwed up by their religion  that they were  uh inculcated with yeah messed up for a  long time and look i think you know  yeah right the dark ages are not over  yet  they the dark ages will end when we end  them when we force them to end it's not  going to end voluntarily go on yeah  children today are celebrating christmas  you know  celebrating  and singing songs to commemorate the  birth of jesus  this is  this is something that  we  we have to be we have to be really  strong in this and that we don't accept  it we don't want it  anymore  anyway you know  not every movement needs leadership you  know i think there are forms of social  change that can come about without  leaders and without followers i think  there are you know  um  [Music]  the nature of the challenge we've got in  facing down  five thousand years ten thousand years  of  religious tradition  you know i think it does need leadership  i think it does  require leadership  whether that leadership is overt or  covert  you know i think you can have an  organization that's secretive frankly  that's a conspiracy  frankly but it's not it's not going to  happen  without  leadership  and  you know there is this quotation from  karl marx i'm an anti-marxist and an  anti-communist by the way that's your  first time saying i'm not a marxist  you know to to paraphrase and truncate  it slightly  religion is the opiate of the masses  it's the soul of a soulless world  um  i don't believe that i disagree with  karl marx i think egotism  is the opiate of the masses i think what  people really like is feeling special  and feeling superior to others  especially in ways that are completely  unearned and unmerited  believing in their intrinsic  superiority rather than just being  superior because you practiced shooting  a basketball for 100 hours and now you  can shoot a basketball well you know  people who have the humbling process of  earning their superiority are rarely on  the synchronous i think the opiate of  the masses is egotism and i think  religion can provide that and i think  atheism can provide it also  it's thus very distressing for me to see  the extent to which  atheism and the leaders of the atheist  movement are so completely  disabled  by egotism they're disabled by this same  opiate masses you know now  in case you know my family religion was  judaism  to a large extent my father had been a  convert to christianity and he had more  than a decade of being a crazy extremist  christian he wasn't just a little bit  christian during his christian period  you know  uh but my mother was jewish and thus i  am considered genetically jewish blah  blah blah i mean i grew up in a very  haunted  household you know in this way but one  of the aspects of judaism is of course  this notion of being the chosen people  you know being special  just just for being born into this uh  tradition  and i got to tell you i think that  that's not a distinctive aspect of  judaism i think that's exactly what  judaism has in common with every other  religion you can meet zen buddhists who  feel special because they're born into  zen buddhism you meet zem buddhists who  feel special because they converted to  zen buddhism and you can meet christians  who feel special because they're  christian  uh so on down the line you know  it's true it exhibits itself somewhat  differently the sense of specialness  when you're talking about a minority  religion as opposed to a dominant  majority religion but still americans  can feel special just because they're  american you know just because they're  part of this nationality this ethos this  constitution this history you know this  democracy whatever it is you know  nationalism is a masculine but it still  involves this sense of being  being chosen  it sickens me to see the same  fundamentally religious attitude  exhibited by  the leaders of the atheist movement  uh the leaders  certainly within my lifetime  all of them that have that have come and  gone  you know  um  [Music]  you want a job  yeah i just want to say i really it  resonated with you what you said about  christians uh people who are religious  they're  antagonistic to atheists it's not like  they're accepting it that's right  they don't  have the same kind of you know we're  supposed to tolerate religious people  but religious people don't tolerate  atheists yeah so  the the most fundamental premise of  christianity is  i'm right you're wrong so when you die  you go to hell  now different christians cope with this  in different ways some say that you  should have this kind of loving and  snide attitude towards atheists and  non-believers kind of invite them in  and some are more harsh and condemning  and so on but  yeah uh tolerance is a lie now i would  just say if you guys want i can talk  about this for an hour solid  the notion of tolerance that is very  much written into the american  constitution the notion of tolerance  that exists in the united states of  america at the end of the puritan period  we might say it's a few decades after  puritanism has kind of lost its luster  but very much influenced by the brief  but bright burning candle of quakerism  in the united states and quakerism is  basically one of several  puritan ideologies and movements  puritanism isn't one thing it isn't one  church there's a wave of  enthusiasm that came and went  the notion of tolerance at that time  it didn't apply to black people  it didn't apply to american indians  it didn't apply to anyone but  quote-unquote us  it didn't even apply to catholics  all right  the notion of tolerance in the united  states america at that time is a unique  product of  the  english  civil war  and you've got to understand what was  going on in christianity in england  before  the english civil war because it really  did cause it in part it's not the only  cause it's one of the most important  causes  what happened during the civil war era  during the dictatorship  so to speak the foster civil war  the brief period of some democracy  followed by dictatorship you know what  you want to say  and then  you know say a century afterward the  long shadow  of what happened they you know came to  this notion  that the best way for christianity to  move forward the best way for it to  advance was to have this very limited  freedom of religion this tolerance of  basically having different puritanical  protestant churches competing with one  another lively discourse and  this was a period of history when  alcoholism was basically 100  the amount of alcohol people's drinking  is unbelievable  and  these groups they believed in shall we  say hearing voices  uh they believed in  uh feeling the spirit of the lord come  into you and you  hit your feet on the ground and you  stammer and speak in a supernatural  voice  they  they believed in superstition in its  most  crass form and it didn't last  you know like even i'm sorry it's  talking about centuries i'm not saying  it was a wasn't just one summer  once it wasn't just a few you know i  mean obviously it changed the fate of  the world get me wrong don't get me  wrong but no it wasn't sustainable now  many of these religions aren't i'll just  mention uh  there was slash is a religion called  subud  one of the few youtube channels  of montreal is still uploading uh videos  you know why are some forms of religion  more durable than others subud also was  based on this notion that you put  yourself into this uh  state of possession by a spirit so to  speak you put yourself into this very  strange uh where they would uh so it's  not a trance i'm the reason i'm not  saying trans i'm aware  technically what a trance is  in any case subwood it's not that  different from what the quakers used to  do where you put yourself in this state  of mind and they'd either get on stage  or stand in the middle of a circle of  people and they'd start dancing and  twitching around in a strange way and  speaking or singing in a strange way  this uh  spontaneous  i mean all these words in english are so  loaded if i say it's possession well  what are you possessed by you know some  form of christianity you're possessed by  the quote unquote holy spirit but  regardless of the kind of philosophical  justification  well you know i think you can imagine  that's the sort of thing that can  motivate people and recruit people it's  a kind of religious experience an  altered state of mind that can have a  big impact on people for 10 years  how do you raise your own children in it  how do you establish and manage  institutions that last for a century  with it  take a look at quakerism today almost  all of the distinctive aspects of the  quaker faith and its founding years have  disappeared  they're aware of them but they've you  know same with mormonism mormonism as it  exists today is totally different from  mormonism in the life of the prophet  mormonism today you know on the outside  it looks so much like any other form of  mainstream christianity you do a little  bit of digging and you find out all the  crazy things they believe in at least on  paper but many mormons will tell you  their own religion is only 10 different  from christianity that's a lie but it  may be a lie they they tell themselves  so in terms of in these religions once  they institutionalize once the centuries  start to pass  uh that's one of the aspects but anyway  um  we have a cultural and political memory  of  tolerance  tolerance as defined during  the english  civil war switzerland doesn't  look at the history of christianity in  switzerland right so switzerland the  great homeland of protestantism that's  where zvingli had his debates with  martin luther okay guess what as soon as  the debates were opened were over  apparently as soon as the debates were  over  zwingli and his followers they start  persecuting everyone who disagrees with  them on any doctrinal point the swiss  tradition even though protestant it's  not catholic it's protestant they're out  there persecuting heretics and today of  course what was considered heretical  it's like minor disagreements about  exactly what happens in the doctrine of  trans  substantiation when you eat a magical  weight for a dream like really minor  things about different kinds of baptism  or something no this is life and death  to them these are you know the nature of  the persecution is incredibly balancing  [Laughter]  sega genesis or super nintendo make up  your mind  gotta be on one side or the other  [Laughter]  uh so i just say like swiss prosthetism  was not part of that that tradition in  england at all now i think some other  parts of europe actually were influenced  by it more or less i think the  netherlands the netherlands has always  been very tightly bound to what's going  on culturally politically in england you  know you can you can make a case in  someone anyway they're across the water  from them and so on um  another story to be told there but yeah  so  we have we are burdened with a false  ideology of tolerance a notion of  tolerance that only ever existed to  serve a certain type of narrow  instrumental purpose within  doctrinaire or protestant christianity  you know  this is one interesting comment here  from turnbull so turn of all i wonder  how my whole life would be different if  i'd settled in scandinavia whether  sweden norway whatever but i'm aware in  most of the studies about atheism  most of the studies say that the country  that has gone the furthest toward  atheism is either sweden nor way denmark  that the scandinavian countries you know  there's some statistical evidence for  this but i think it's mostly just the  anecdotal experience of being there and  meeting people and talking to people  that it seems like it seems like  everyone's an atheist but in any case a  significant percentage of people are are  atheists and then scandinavia atheism  has become the dominant discourse so i  turn vol writes in and says quote in  scandinavia it's the opposite religious  people accept atheists well we give them  a harder time  um okay but here's the problem i still  want to put to you uh turn of all you  know  the power  that a parent has over their own child  now we have traditions in canada  of tattooing your face  and there are talks now about reviving  those traditions because most of them  were eliminated by christianity they  were forced to cease to exist by  christian  missionaries and i saw one youtube video  from one woman who's inuit you know  genetically her ancestry is inuit what  people commonly call eskimo still  um  and you know she made the decision to  tattoo her face in the tradition  of her great-grandmother or something  for how many generations have been in  her family since they had this there are  still some photographs of what those  tattoos look like  well you know i think it is one thing  for an adult to make the decision to  tattoo their own face  and  we probably do need laws about exactly  when you're an adult when do you get to  make decisions at you is it 18 is it 16  is it 14 is it 21  it's a big decision to tattoo your own  face it really is  um but i think probably everyone in this  audience immediately  just because that is an act of rebellion  against christianity to say you're going  to recapture  the appearance of your great  grandparents before christian  missionaries arrived there's a sense in  which we sympathize that on the other  hand  it also represents a kind of  superstition and a kind of religion that  none of us would sympathize with we  don't want to return to  uh worshipping the evil spirit that's at  the bottom of the ocean that catches  finger men and drags them down to the  bottom of the sea sorry inuit mythology  is it's very evocative in this way but  you know the the water there is  unbelievably cold and deadly so a big  part of their cultural experience is  anyone who falls over the side of the  boat is almost immediately dead uh  whether they sink or swim you know what  if even if they if you get them out of  the water they've been so uh  so totally chilled that they they don't  recover and so on so this idea that  falling in the water is death  influences a great deal of their their  religious imagery and i read so i used  to research this stuff i was in a  university program i read an account of  a christian missionary who at least in  his area  introduced writing for the first time to  the anyway  so i know you know it's a huge area so  i'm not saying this is definitely this  is the first white man to teach them how  to read and write anywhere in there  bernice in his in his area none of them  none of them had the concept of reading  and writing before and he came and  explained them at that time inuit  culture was very vibrant it hadn't been  exterminated by  uh european influence yet  and uh so he's talking them through how  the phonetics work and then the first  thing he writes  on the board it's in any way it's their  equivalent of you know kichi manito and  in korean ojibwe you know um you know so  they have a word of language for the the  great spirit for this kind of this this  monotheistic god who to some extent is  bigger than all the other gods who  actually includes them you know they  have this kind of idea that there's a  kind of mega god even though they have  stories about smaller gods also you know  and then he wrote i forget it was on a  chalkboard which wrote on some surface  this is the arctic they probably didn't  have a chalkboard it was probably i  don't know what the hell he was writing  on  he was writing on something that gallery  um he wrote in the phonetics he had just  explained to them how the phoneticism  was he wrote the great spirit  loves you  and all of them were stunned  in silence  and they sounded it out and they looked  each other  and it's not that they didn't have that  concept they had the concept of god  they were terrified  god for them god or gods that was the  thing at the bottom of the ocean that  pulls you down to  [Laughter]  to be trapped forever at the bottom of  the sea i mean you know it's there's a  lot of fear a lot of fear and trembling  in an inuit uh  uh you know mythology and here was this  guy telling you you know the the one  true god you know loves you this message  of love and so on  and this is a stunning you know turning  point in there  in their religion  um  yeah  it's easy to sympathize with someone who  wants to  tattoo their own  face  what if  this same woman has a child  and now wants to tattoo  the child's face  when they're still a baby  when they're eight years old like maybe  they can talk but they're not really at  a level to understand  the consequences of this decision  you know even in scandinavia i'm just  i'm just going to i don't plan to ever  spend time in scandinavia  i can imagine in a different life i  would have ended up there um partly  because i hear really good things about  the university system like that alone is  a reason for me to move to another  country  by the way just just being with you i've  also done research and i've read a lot  of bad things i've heard both i have i  did do enough research to realize you  have a lot of really deep problems with  university education i do i do know that  um but nevertheless compared to canada i  can imagine that i would have i could  have ended up you know  somewhere in scandinavia but in  scandinavia you know if you think you've  won  you know i i really disagree  um because of the power parents still  have over children  the the power they have to  tattoo their own faces tattoo the face  the statue the faith of their ancestors  onto those children obviously religious  upbringing religious education and and  so on  and um  yeah i look i will i could do i could do  a documentary movie about it we'd go to  scandinavia we could really interview  people and do research and ask  calls like scandinavia have we won yet  i don't know come up with a catchy title  but questioning  you know is this victory is this the end  point for atheism and i i can tell you  right now i think my conclusion would be  no  um you know that you can't be complacent  that this hasn't gone nearly far enough  and both geographically and culturally i  would put to you the the possibility  what if scandinavia is in a transition  now of gradually drifting over toward  the same kind of normalcy um represented  by russia the ukraine eastern europe i  mean i know culturally and  linguistically you're different people  but i mean look at finland i'm sorry you  know i mean  your history is not easily extricated  from russia specifically it's the giant  next door  um  you could drift back toward being a more  religious country uh you know again if  you don't take really decisive steps now  but yes i mean i think scandinavia  provides a fascinating set of  contrasting examples and the role of of  religion and education and culture and  politics there  um  you know i just mentioned  in germany several of the most powerful  political parties  identify their religion in the name  you know the christian democrats being  the most obvious but which parties are  christian  which parties are specifically catholic  and protestant and so on that's written  right on the ticket there you know now  any of us would regard that as barbaric  in iraq any of us who regard that as  barbaric in iran oh how can you have a  you know it's actually an issue in syria  too the difference from you know alawite  islam is different from the other forms  of islam and so on oh how can you have a  political party or a political fashion  that's defined by its religious  affiliation well you've got that overtly  still in germany  in the 21st century and i remember i  mean i crossed swords with this very  powerful charity  in scandinavia swedish church aid  i think that's the name sorry if i'm  gonna name slightly wrongs maybe it was  even scandinavian church i forget but i  know there were very very powerful  church charities and they were [ __ ]  things up for us in places like laos and  cambodia where i had to deal with them  anyone i remember people from  scandinavia saying oh but you have to  understand these these organizations  they're barely christian and you know  and i know what they're comparing it to  i know those organizations get it  they're not as christian as  like american missionary outfits guess  what guys  in terms of the future of laos and  cambodia um no this is this is a very  potent form of christian efforts  just reading through your comments  oh  so yeah one of the saddest issues of all  here our regular contributor  do you want to give me lucas says quote  atheists one child per couple  evangelicals three children per couple  well the statistics are even more  worrying than that and there's are we  talking with the united states are we  talking about saudi arabia are we  talking about palestine you know i'm  talking about israel judaism within  israel  um  so you have to disaggregate the data and  now  we do this in social sciences all the  time this is normal procedure for data  analysis  in political science or whatever you  want to say  of the families who have seven children  in israel  what percentage are atheists  of the families who have six children in  israel what percentage of atheists of  the families that have five children  four children three children two  children one child  zero children  right so you have to break it down and  make a make a bar chart that shows those  splits that's where you really see the  difference so yeah the the statistic  using is probably an average like on  average evangelicals have three well  yeah but that's an average  when you look at the upper end of the  spectrum  who are the people having  three four five six seven eight nine ten  children  they're almost all  religious maniacs  um  now you know some are christian  some are jewish some are muslim  but  it is incredibly rare to find uh  an atheistic modern secular person who  has you know  let's say more than four children but i  think as you go up the chart you'll see  like almost all of them have either zero  one or two children and thus the the  averages is down there now  there are reasons  um  and again by the way this my father  would be  to say ashamed would be to totally  misrepresent his character he was  incapable of feeling shame but my father  would not be able to cope with my saying  this openly the reason why my father had  so many children was that he used to be  a crazy christian he used to be uh  committed to a form of charismatic  christianity and then i mean he always  was left-wing he was a left-wing crazy  christian but then he moved on into this  different phases of his communist  identity he then wanted to misrepresent  his past as if he always had been a  communist and there's some truth to that  i mean you know he he wasn't  conservative when he was a christian  maniac  um but he would not have had nearly so  many children if he hadn't been for  those say 10 years roughly um committed  to a strange form of of christianity and  by the way  for some reason his form of christianity  legal marriage celibacy not so much  you know you know people pick and choose  uh getting a whole bunch of random hoe  bags pregnant that was his form of  christianity and you know he could back  it up read the old testament there were  a lot of guys having kids with a lot of  different women in the old testament  like if you actually read the bible in  the actually in the new testament  there's enough of that too the new  testament is shorter and there's less  about family uh but there are there's  enough material so he could justify uh  getting all these women pregnant you  know  uh here you just quote chapter and verse  you know there's enough of that in  christianity and yeah  um  as i've said many times under many  different headings  the excuses  are harder to quit  than the thing itself  yeah so look coming back to the  you know the very real very palpable  very important issue here  introduced by do you want to give me the  kiss  what do you think the future of israel  is  just 20 years from now given this fact  you know and and by the way we can like  repeat this within palestine or whatever  you want to call it the occupied terror  whatever turn you want to use  you know within the occupied territories  you can do  a similar chart for muslims okay how  many people are having seven kids or i  don't know if you gotta start at nine or  ten how many people have ten kids nine  eight seven six five four three two one  how many people are religious who have  many kids and then when you get down to  the lower numbers what percentage of  people are atheist versus religious in  this case meaning  uh muslim predominantly um  and then what's the knock-on effect of  that  uh 10 years from now 20 years from now  and so on israel  already is a country dominated by  religious maniacs some of them are  muslim maniacs some of them are jewish  maniacs  there's a very influential christian  maniac minority in israel even though  they may not have big numbers they're  organized and well-funded there are  christians in israel and they're very  passionate  you can imagine why  and you know  the people who have modern secular  atheist anti-clerical attitudes  they're over represented in all the  walks of life that are actually getting  [ __ ] done right like you can live your  life in israel today you can live in  haifa or any of these places and it  seems like everyone you meet  is secular or atheist everyone you meet  at the vegan restaurant you know  everyone you let's say you work in the  banking system or something any any kind  of high level executive people it seems  like all the time you're dealing with  people who are either just barely  nominally religious or they're actually  anti-religious and non-religious yeah  um  but that minority  is getting smaller and smaller  and they're becoming voiceless  and if you live in israel  and you have a child and put your child  into a school  what is the effect of putting your child  into a school  where the vast majority of the other  children are unassailable  in their religious  convictions where they're the local  majority so to speak again i think any  of you would be terrified to put your uh  put your children into an old muslim  school where your child is the one  atheist in a school where everyone else  is a muslim you know well you know  within israel both for jew for for all  three for jewish people for christian  people and for uh muslim people it  becomes impossible for the exceptional  atheists to really raise their children  as anti-religious shall we say unless  you commit to  you know homeschooling unless you commit  to raising your kids totally cut off  from the society uh that surrounds them  do you want to jump in on that baby  um  so it's not just long-term  demographic change that's the problem  with  religious people having more kids than  secular and atheist people right there's  there are also you know issues of kind  of direct short-term  cultural influence and frankly bullying  you know i mean that is that is your  experience in school if your experience  in school is all the teachers are muslim  all your classmates are muslim  everyone's participating in these  religious rituals  everyone's talking about what are you  doing this weekend i mean the same way  for many of us we grew up with people  talking about their plans for christmas  you know it's just the most natural  thing you grew up you grow up immersed  in that well then just sustaining an  atheist minority becomes a constant act  of quite dangerous defiance  and rebellion and so yeah this factor  alone you know can we ever win  there's someone in the audience who's  using the name food favors  um and their parents enrolled them in a  catholic school for a few years not  clear mayors and then later  uh he or she was enrolled in madrasa in  a mosque  so an islamic school uh oh so both were  for at least five years  so catholic education for at least five  years and then  uh madrasa for at least five years and  he or she says that he or she  learned arabic and had to memorize the  quran so that the memorization and  recitation of the crime very simply uh  this contributor in the audience says  quote no good memories from the catholic  or the islamic school  oh  so frida says it is very damaging you  develop superstitious thought patterns  even when you're not religious anymore  so you know guys under a bunch of  different headings people have told me  that i should be a therapist because  they're concerned about my ability to  make money which is a reasonable concern  how am i never gonna earn a living and  you know  people sometimes say that because  they've seen my videos talking about  drug addiction and sobriety or they see  my videos about video game addiction and  self-discipline or they see my videos  that are in a philosophical way talking  about living a meaningful life you know  i've seen what i have to stand or  different  even the videos have been talking about  fitness and exercise and stuff you know  people say oh you should be a therapist  you know you should get some kind of  some kind of license or credential so  you can be a therapist  and help people one-on-one and earn a  living doing it  if you were a therapist  how would you actually  help these people  you know  so  you guys know her if you've been  watching my channel i know one ex-mormon  some people here are mentioning examples  of ex-mormons i know one ex-mormon and  by the way i'm not going to say anything  that she hasn't put on the internet  herself either on youtube or on podcasts  she used to do both  her name used to be american unicorn  which by the way was a name i gave her  it's a funny story um she changed her  youtube channel a different name before  but she her youtube channel and  instagram she changed them all to  american unicorn because of a comment i  made about her in passing  on my channel  okay she  so she was raised mormon and when i  first knew where she was completely  devout  committed woman  she went from being  anorexic  to being an obsessive bodybuilder  sorry i don't alexa stop  she went from being anorexic to being an  obsessive bodybuilder  uh she went from being  a devout mormon  to being  an atheist  she went from  sobriety to some moderate level of use  of i think marijuana and alcohol and  that kind of thing soft drugs  at least at least she was drinking  alcohol forgetting she smoking so  and she also went from being vegan to  being a mediator she had all these very  strange transformations in her life and  oh yeah i mean again i i i'm not going  to give any details but she was pretty  public about this  she went from you know being a virgin  until marriage and only having been with  one man to shall we say a more liberal  uh position in life and and more diverse  experiences in life so i don't know how  much of that is still on her instagram i  think like a lot of people think she  later deleted some of her comments on  instagram stuff some of her posts fine  it's totally her yeah  um  [Music]  it's not fair to say looking at her life  that she had one period of being damaged  by religion and and then a period where  she was fine and she had recovered  like both periods all of these extremes  she's still [ __ ] up by religion in the  before and after she's just coping in  different ways and you know again i'm  not putting words in her mouth or  something you can look at her period of  being an anorexic and at that time i  believe she was a virgin she was you  know celibate until marriage  um  you can look at that as her coping with  her religious upbringing with the faith  inculcating her and you can look at her  period of rebelling against that in  different ways a period of bodybuilding  and so on  it's not like one is the problem and  one's the solution like they're both  imperfect tragic  psychopathological  ways of coping with the same religious  upbringing and look you know i don't  know her like that i  i know i know her pretty well i know  i know we're better than my own brothers  and sisters you know i i don't know you  know i'm not on any kind of speaking  terms with any of my brothers and  sisters he's not saying much but you  know i know her to a to a limited extent  i know i know about a lot of things in  her life that are not on the internet  and i'm not going to divulge you know  um  there is no before and after i mean  sorry again same with with tom baker  it's not like there was this period  before where she was damaged and then  there's after where she's not  damaged anymore it's like looking at her  life there's a series of struggles to  cope with  the way in which she's broken and she  remains this  broken person  i'm sure she wouldn't like my saying  that but on the other hand if we were  having a face-to-face conversation or an  eye on talking about i'm sure i could  state it in an inoffensive way that  she'd probably agree with and  and reflect on  and now you know  a lot of people a lot of people like  that i mean aaron janus claims to be i i  can't trust i mean in terms of what she  says in your youtube videos  you know you tell me but aaron janice  has one video up that i've shared the  link to before  uh where she's talking about her  religion and her religious upbringing  but she does she isn't honest in that  video with the extent where she  flip-flopped like she was involved with  a kind of uh authoritarian traditional  christianity for one period of her life  but she was involved with a lot of other  weird  spiritual stuff in other periods of life  and exactly what the timeline has been  she's someone who flip-flopped between  different uh  religious extremes and again they're all  coping mechanisms if there is no before  and after you know it's not that before  this was a problem and now you're  uh now you're done with it so you want  to jump in  that video was with the documentary the  indian filmmaker  i know yeah so i just say she's another  example of somebody  oh  oh yeah okay so with maggie maggie so  i'll tell your story  so  maggie um  yeah  it's incredibly boring i feel sorry  don't don't shout out youtube videos  that are as boring as watching paint  draw  but you know uh so maggie is this vegan  filmmaker and she made the video with uh  aaron janice talking about her religious  struggles i guess you know it's a  question  maggie from her own perspective she had  a before and after that she had a  religious upbringing and now she's over  and done with it but that's not my  perspective on maggie so again i'm not  saying anything private about maggie  she's someone i have spoken to privately  but only here i'm going to say things  that she said publicly in her own  youtube videos  she reacted to  christianity which in her form of  christianity had taught her to be a  virgin until marriage only ever have sex  with one man and to  raise children with that man she reacted  against that  by becoming an anti-daedalist  frankly  hyper self-indulgent  [ __ ]  that's i'm not you know misrepresenting  her too much she had this period of her  life of really sleeping around of really  aggressively pursuing one night's stance  and she was working uh basically in a  nightclub  she was doing venue side management  related to stand-up comedy  so you know and it's a kind of you know  people are getting drunk people are  laughing people are enjoying themselves  and she has been very honest and saying  she had this period of her life of you  know sleeping with uh  with some comedians and so on no i think  i don't think she only slept with  stanford  okay so i mean you can look at that are  you gonna say yeah before you were sick  and damaged and now you're cured you  know like again sorry talking about this  guy you know uh tom baker  like  every stage of his life is coping with  the damage done to him by religion and  you know  you know there's cosmology involved what  is the darkness to you what do you see  in the shadows what do you see in your  dreams what are the symbolic  significance of things in life how do  you think about the world how do you  think about the last 5 000 years of  history in the next 5 000 years of  history i'll give this may be a  remarkable or unusual comparison for you  guys but um  elon musk  is popularizing the notion  that this planet earth  is something we can discard and move on  from  he believes that human beings can live  on mars and in the immediate future he  keeps giving these projections like  within 10 years within these really  short times which are and he keeps  blowing his deadlines too because he's  been doing this for a long time he keeps  saying they're going to be these  miraculous advances towards having human  life  on mars  now one of the reasons why i'm such a  harsh critic of that why i warn people  against this mentality is that it  changes your cosmology  it changes your view of  what the world is and what the life is  over say a ten thousand year time span  the five thousand years before the five  thousand years  after okay now look the reality is in  terms of the laws of physics  we will never  never  have a self-reliant human population on  the moon or mars  if human beings ever do live there it  will be in exactly the same  circumstances as they're currently in  the space station in orbit meaning they  rely on earth for water and food and so  on it is it is not possible  it's actually easier to produce food in  orbit around the earth in a uh in a  satellite it would basically be it would  be completely impossible to farm on mars  to raise food on mars  just very briefly one of the reasons  that is that if you're in orbit around  the earth  at least the sunlight you get from the  sun is the same intensity as earth you  don't have the atmosphere you have other  disadvantages but at least you got the  sunlight to work with on mars you don't  don't even have the sunlight but you  don't have sunlight you don't have soil  you don't have any of the things  taken for granted well you know some  people would say isn't it just harmless  for people to grow up with science  fiction assumptions about the future of  life on earth the future of life on mars  i don't think it's harmless at all i  think it has real world consequences  here and now well in this way  inculcating children with a certain kind  of cosmology  with a certain view of yes even the  geography of the world and the timeline  of world history past present future and  for most most christians  most muslims and a significant  percentage of jews this timeline  includes the end of the world the idea  that this whole planet is going to be  discarded that has consequences for  ecology it has consequences for whether  or not you think it's perfectly morally  acceptable to kill and eat cows every  day to have more than a billion people  killing and eating more than a billion  cows on the same planet every oh well  you know we're going to run out of water  we're going to run out of like you know  all these terrible ecological costs  well if you think the world is going to  end when jesus comes back if you think  the world is going to end on judgment  day if you think the world only exists  to be a play thing for the short term  delectation of human beings then  there isn't much of a moral argument to  care about how many billion cows there  are dying for basically human  entertainment right  these things have this on this  cosmological  level you know these things really  matter it changes the way you see the  world when you're awake changes the way  you see the world when you're asleep  uh it changes your whole life forever  including when you are in that  phase of your life of  rebelling against  it you know  um  so look i've said this before and again  the main reason why sexuality comes up  in these conversations is just because  it's so easy to visualize like for  example the status of homosexuals in  christianity and the lies they're told  and you know so-called gay conversion  therapy it's very easy to see  the harm being done the kind of  cosmological things we're talking about  here it's it's much harder so guys i've  said before in other contexts i try to  be sex positive i try it's kind of an  uphill battle it's kind of a positive  there are so many bad things about sex  frankly there's so many ways in which it  destroys people's lives and prevents  them from leading a meaningful life  there are a lot of bad things about sex  but i try i try to be sex positive i  think in principle we sort of ought to  be despite all the disadvantages of it  you know  okay  sex  is one thing  the human ego  is another  you know  what you get with a lot of ex christians  is people having sex just to prove they  can  people having sex as an act of rebellion  against the church as an act of  rebellion against their upbringing  sex  to prove that you're smarter than your  own parents or grandparents to prove  that you're smarter than your school  teachers you may have had school  teachers who inculcated christian  morality into you sex and again i mean i  don't believe religion is the opinion of  the masses i believe egoism is the  religion of masses sex you know attached  to your  your ego in this way  it's very easy for those people to say  that they're now ex-christian or  post-christian and atheist a lot of  people they still are haunted by it they  still are  damaged by it  and of course my own father is an  example i mean you know my father was my  father was such a nutcase i mean i a lot  of time i don't feel is worth talking  about just because when you're dealing  with people who have really extremely  abnormal psychology it's not going to be  very meaningful for anyone else  in the audience to uh  to talk about it you know but sure you  know my point being  living your life  in defiance of religion  this still isn't atheism this still  isn't the end goal  of atheism you know  it's being in a position of of genuine  indifference towards religion where we  regard you know  the religion of christianity the  religion of judaism the religious land  we regard these  these judeo-christian religions  with the same sort of indifference  as you know learning about a quaint  you know ancestral cult we've never  heard of before from some distant  ancient people you know who've already  lived and died on this earth more than a  thousand years ago  um the same way it's merely of academic  interest to talk about the religious  beliefs for example of the ancient  romans  um the preposterous notion in ancient  athens and ancient rome  of you know  dissecting a bird  and examining its internal organs  to foretell the outcome of a battle  you know  um  [Music]  you know we we can read about that and  it has no power over us  including we do not feel we need to  rebel against it in any way that's the  end point that's the end goal of atheism  and i'll say now guys i'm going to take  a moment to read your comments again  but um  you know how do we get there  well one huge part of the struggle has  to be cultural production it has to be  the production of new songs new stories  new rituals new cartoons  to really challenge  and replace the christian ones  that's not the whole struggle it's not  the whole story  i mean for me it's not enough to open  an atheist school  we have to actually shut down  the christian schools and if you aren't  willing to be honest with yourself about  that you're not an atheist  you're not anticlerical like you know  i'm sorry  very brief aggression but some of you  people don't know this some of you've  never thought this too before okay  if you feel that a vegan diet is just a  personal choice that improves your own  life but you're completely indifferent  to whether or not your own husband or  wife eats meat in front of you  has meat in your fridge is buying meat  with your money you know what i mean and  is cooking meat on your pots and pans if  you are completely different to whether  or not your own children eat meat  whether they're not your own work  colleagues you mean whether they're not  your own parents and grandparents  if you just regard this  as a fad diet that you're doing for your  own health or doing for your own  amusement then there is a very  meaningful sense in which you are not  vegan at all you're just eating vegan  food right because the most fundamental  premise of veganism is it doesn't matter  if i eat meat or you eat meat  as long as someone is paying money to  produce beef to produce leather  this same industrialized system of  production carries on right so it  absolutely inevitably and inexorably  must be that if i am vegan i want you to  be vegan also i want all humanity to be  vegan or as as larger percentages we can  get to now of course that is a desire  that is going to be frustrated  that's not the point  i'm not commenting on whether or not  that's an attainable desire  most desires worth talking about are  unattainable okay  [Laughter]  you know  yes this really is implicitly built into  the definition of veganism oh yeah it  makes no sense to call yourself an  atheist if you think atheism is just  something you dabble in for your own  amusement or your own entertainment that  it just improves your own life  but you're completely comfortable with  taking your own child  and putting your child into a madrassa  to be forced to memorize and recite the  quran to carry out these rituals to have  inculcated them if you think your  atheism dies with you your own children  will revert to the religion you have  reacted right this makes no sense  i've and i know your own brothers or  sisters have children so look at your  brother look at yours like maybe you  don't have children  your whole family is having children and  raising the next generation in the same  traditions in the same religion the same  superstitions  the same beliefs as your  great-grandparents if you don't have a  problem with that if you don't want to  challenge and change that you're not an  atheist right and then yeah you can  scale it up and you tell me what we're  talking about on the the scale of minds  i just say this comes back to one of the  first things i said in this video the  opiate of the masses is not  religion it's egotism you know  um  [Music]  what i see  dominating  the american atheist movement the  british atheist movement and the  australian atheist because they're all  on youtube together these people the  english-speaking atheist what i see  dominating these movements  is  the belief  the smug  conviction  you know of in one's own superiority  that and then they look down on these  other people oh well that's fine for  them that's fine for people like my  brother you know my brother he's not the  sharpest tack in the stack you know  people like that's fine that they carry  on with that for those people that's  fine but not for supposedly elite  special people like  you and i so the ego the egotism leads  to this very strange form of  de-politicized indifference the egotism  leads to a kind of  social irresponsibility even for your  own brother and sister let alone on the  scale of millions for your  for your fellow man  now i just mentioned here  if you are evaluating the democracy of  ancient athens  the religion of athens  had advantages  and disadvantages  there is definitely a sense in which you  can look at the religion of athens  or more broadly say the religiosity of  athens and see the way in which it  contributed to the creation of democracy  the participation of democracy we can  talk about that we can talk about the  advantages  of the religion of athens  i am saying to you sincerely  in the 21st century  christianity  has  no  advantages  none  you're going to hear  no compromise for me on this  there is no other side of the coin there  is no silver lining  in that cloud  i'm saying  it's all  bad  i'm not saying  throw the baby out with the bath water  i'm saying to you there is no baby there  is only bathwater now  ancient athens  there were a lot of absolutely  terrifying aspects of that religion if  you look into it i would say herodotus  if you want to know what religion was  like in the ancient world including  human sacrifice animal sacrifice just  the craziness of religion and that  period you know the way in which it's  terrifying i'm i'm conceding the point  that there were some positive aspects  about the religion of the the  religiosity of the athenians but  wow there were negative aspects and if  you were alive at that time or if you  walked into a time machine now you would  be an atheist in your way in athens too  and you would have to be very careful  that you didn't end up  dead like socrates you would have to be  very careful in how you moved in  challenging or opposing the uh the  religious views that were predominant in  your time they were the religion was  compulsory there was i mean there was  more freedom within athenian religion  than there was in the dark ages of  catholic europe but  um  you you were compelled to respect and  participate in all the the public cults  which occupied uh it's only 300 days a  year and there was there was a religious  festival not quite every day but the  number of festivals and religious  observances to be attended in downtown  athens is unbelievable was not a small  part of your time  so you know i'm just  can we be honest with ourselves about  what  atheism means  it doesn't mean  that you only find fault with the  contents  of the box doesn't mean you're going to  reach inside the box and take out  take out homophobia  take out judgment take out hell  but that you're going to keep the box  you're going to put new  positive  wonderful humanitarian 21st century  sentiments into the box love your  brother and all this [ __ ] or equality of  man okay you can't just take this  beautiful box and take out slavery and  take out gender inequality and take out  homophobia you know take out the fear of  you know  eternal punishment in hell okay  atheism  means  you're willing to throw out the whole  box  it means you're willing to burn the  church down and have  nothing  left  boo hoo  we're gonna lose all those paintings of  baby jesus boo [ __ ] who  what a goddamn tragedy it will be to  have lost the decorative arts  of the christian tradition  i don't like disneyland  i don't like the disney corporation  i don't like disney movies i don't i'm a  critic  i think  with disneyland  you can take some things out of the box  put new things in and keep the box i do  i think disneyland can change  i think disneyland does not have to be  burnt down i think  you can take pocahontas  out of disneyland  and disneyland can endure i mean as you  guys may know  disneyland is now more and more about  star wars they have star star wars has  been added to the box  well maybe we can make some room for  star wars by taking out pocahontas and  just burn  that  like maybe pocahontas has to be [ __ ]  banished has to be uh  emulated  [Laughter]  you know  the disney movie version of pocahontas  and all the marketing and toys connect  to it  yeah the time has come for pocahontas to  disappear from walt disney theme parks  and from their list of movies you can  see that yeah i do i do think that  specific film but i am willing to  concede the point  you know it's it's not all bad there are  advantages and disadvantages and because  it is a fundamentally secular  organization it's fundamentally  anti-clerical and atheist even  disneyland can change  all right we can have a better future  with disneyland we don't have to burn  disneyland town but can we be  honest with ourselves all right the  future is not christianity the future is  not judaism the future is not islam not  even a little bit  what are we willing to do  to get there  i've never had one  atheist youtube channel  reach out to me  cooperate with me in any way  my memory not even on twitter you know  what i mean like not even  not even someone sharing the link to one  of my videos and saying hey this is  great you guys should check out  never  not one skype call  not one interview not one in invitation  to come to an event they're still having  events they look like really dorky  [ __ ] events  they don't look like an event i want to  attend at all  um  you know  why is that  this is the reason why  all right  even if they don't really think it  through  none of them are comfortable with this  part of my message which is so [ __ ]  self-evident it's so obvious  none of them like okay look  amongst vegans  it's real easy to get people to agree  that yeah the ultimate goal of veganism  would be to have  a 100 vegan world to have a world in  which 100 of people  are committed to not eating meat not  eating cheese etc right that's not real  controversial the only pushback you're  going to get is well what about people  who are literally marooned on a desert  island what about a few tiny populations  of indigenous people on remote islands  in papua new guinea yeah yeah  you get some people like well people who  who narrow down to say they want the  planet earth to be 98 vegan and there  are still two percent of people living  in such remote areas or such uh you know  primitive conditions that they should be  allowed to eat  amazingly in 2022 it's it's not just  controversial but i am demonized i am a  pariah  in the atheist movement i am hated and  denounced by other atheists even here on  youtube i am regarded as crazy and an  extremist because i'm talking about a  100 atheist planet earth  if that's not what you want  what what do you want  you know like what what what is your  model of the future is it catholic  schools  inculcating this religion into children  forever and ever  like and a lot of these people so let's  just say you yourself are a heartbroken  catholic like like tom was  okay  you want your own children and  grandchildren and great-grandchildren in  the future you want them to go through  the same traumatizing experience you had  you you endure catholic school and you  rebel against it like you're the tiny  minority who rebel against it and become  atheist and realize it's all horseshit  and you realize the extent to which  you're emotionally damaged sexually  damaged intellectually warped by this  experience you reflect on you think  yeah you know what  this is the meaning of life let's just  let's just have it go on forever you  know let's just have this repeat for all  eternity let's even have as in the case  of uh russia the former soviet union  let's have the power of the church  expand and increase and be more  entrenched for for centuries to come  that's  that's your idea of the future  um  you know i've heard  atheists say  that their role  i wonder if they got this from  christopher hitchens like there's  probably one specific person who said  this first but i've heard it from many  different people  that their role  is merely to engage in the mockery of  religion  you know that by by  you know  what progress is veganism going to make  if our  you know the engine of social change is  satire  if you have vegans devoted to stand-up  comedy yes  you know and again i think the most  dangerous aspect of that the the  mockery-based movement is that it all  comes back to egoism it all comes back  to this notion of i'm intellectually  superior to others supposedly that you  know oh here i am in this benighted  intellectually superior minority i was i  was the one kid in my catholic school  who rebelled against the system  and therefore i'm gonna look down my  nose with these people and and make fun  of them you know well you know what  political movements start making  progress not when they're mocking other  people but when they're actually helping  them  it's just ridiculous you know hey you  know what's a big problem in america  obesity  do you want to have a movement to  improve public health through mockery  through shame through satire  let's have more stand-up comedians  telling fat jokes and insulting people  for being over is that what you want to  do is that the future of  you want to reduce the obesity rate you  want to reduce the rate of diabetes  through  shame and humiliation and joking like  no  um  so these these are the dominant cross  currents of our time nobody should be  surprised that i am hated  by buddhists nobody should be surprised  that i'm hated by  muslims or christians or jews jews tend  to have very mixed feelings about me  i've had emails over the years from jews  trying to convert me  to judaism you know wanting to pull me  into the religion i have  they didn't succeed  um anyway you know  of course it makes sense that i'm hated  by those groups and then i'm a hated  outside  but i'm hated by atheists  that's the state we're at in the year  2022.  catching up with your comments right now  guys  so i just say you know um  some more comments here about  psychological consequences of having  religious upbringing  if you  regret and resent  that the quality of education you had  was bad  i do  many of you  many of you may think in your lives well  you know  my life would have turned out so much  differently if i'd had a better  education in math if i had a better  education in chemistry if you had better  education in french if you'd learned  that language instead of it being this  kind of alienating failure of an  experience it was your professional  articulation whatever it may be you know  but you may also reflect on some of  those things in your life and think  sometimes you may think you know what  if i'd had a better education in france  or ever was  really  my life would have turned out the same  way you know really  i still would have had these thoughts  and feelings i still would have gone in  this direction you might reflect that  even though you maybe resent or regret  that you know that actually who you are  your values your way of thinking what  direction you you want to be the same  religion it's the ultimate  counter example when you're talking  about the psychological effects  the emotional effects  the intellectual effects  there's a whole world of spooks  there are all these abstractions that  haunt you and if you didn't have a  religious upbringing you wouldn't even  know what those words mean you wouldn't  care about them and you know your life  would not be like that like you when you  look back at your life when you look at  the religious vocabulary the way of  thinking about ethics the way of  understanding yourself and who you are  and your feelings and your your way of  thinking about fate your way of thinking  about choices you make and decisions as  opposed to decisions made by god and  things being in god's hands you know  it's really impossible to deal with how  different your whole life would be if  you just didn't even know those concepts  if you didn't have that cosmology or you  know obviously you would have heard  about it eventually if you were learning  about that stuff the first time at age  15 as something from a foreign culture  you know if your view of christianity  were as distant and exotic as your view  of tibetan buddhism let's say like  you're aware there is this crazy  religion tibetan buddhism you're aware  that they did human sacrifice and black  magic and all this weird stuff and  tantric sex rituals you're aware of that  you can kind of learn about it it's of  some intellectual interest you know if  your relationship to christian doctrine  muslim doctrine so if it were in that  way too there's no way to exaggerate  what a different person you would  you would be today and you know just  your internal monologue  how it is you think about and understand  your own life how you reflect on your  own feelings how you feel about things  in the split second where you first  react to them those things are all  shaped by christianity they're all  shaped by these religions  to an extent it's very very hard to get  stressed with and it's very very hard to  ever get over you know  what it is that's thinkable and what it  is that's unthinkable for you for the  whole rest of your life what it is you  feel guilty about and what it is you  enjoy  um  you know you can look back at your life  and say gee if i had received a better  education in music my whole life would  be different and you can reflect on say  you know what if i'd learned to play the  guitar and i had a good music teacher  you know really my life would be the  same you can you can do but there are  two sides to that you know you may feel  ambivalence about that you may reflect  on different ways different times  religion it's all in one category  there's no kidding yourself your whole  life would be completely different if  you'd been adopted and raised by muslim  parents if you'd been adopted and raised  by catholic parents and it's different  today because you were raised by the  particular parents you had with with a  particular religion you had and there is  a sense in which religion religious  people will never know what it's like  just to grow up without that  superstition without that fear without  that worldview without that cosmology  it's like being circumcised you don't  know what you've lost as a man you could  never know what sex was like if you had  the other 60 of your nerve endings it's  unknowable to you it's unfathomable it's  impossible to imagine well you don't  know what your life would be like if you  had grown up just without being  inculcated with these  religious values this ethical system  this worldview this cosmology  just trying to catch up their comments  guys  okay so great comment again from our  regular contributor do you want to give  me lucas um  he he or she says i forget do we know  the gender of kiss i don't know okay  uh  let's assume i grew up without religious  baggage  i would still be surrounded by it right  now  right  so  i had a kind of internet friend  we're not close and i know i've spoken  to him for many many years but i  remember talking to this guy before i  went to  montreal  montreal quebec canada  and then i talked to him again after  i've been in montreal and he'd lived  there for many years he lived in quebec  for a big part of his life  and i said to him  i just can't shake my sense of horror  being surrounded by  the christian church at all times the  way i am in montreal  i am not comfortable walking down the  street there or spending any time in  that city where the horizon is dominated  by one catholic edifice  after another and by the way there are  protestant buildings competing with them  because there are some protestants that  want you to come over to their side or  whatever or they're just you know  whatever there are also protestant  churches they're competing with whatever  the history of the particular church may  be and i remember scientology had a big  edifice there too so there were some new  religious groups but the way in which  your life is done but and what he said  back to me is  honestly he said he reflected he was  very surprised to receive the message  and he said i never noticed he said he  grew up there he doesn't even see it  it's invisible to him you know to him  it's normal it's like the  the boiling frog  it's different  i mean if you really grow up  unreligious or anti-religious right what  is tolerable to you and what is  intolerable is different this comes back  to the absurdity of our notion of  tolerance of course but i'm i'm telling  you  montreal  is not tolerable to me montreal is not  secular enough for me montreal is not  atheist enough for me how do you think i  do in indonesia how do you think i do in  malaysia  like how do you think i would cope with  living in more religious  countries or contacts  so yeah it's hard  and certainly it's a good comparison  with veganism the same way non-vegans  are blind to the fact that there are  advertisements for slaughtered animals  around them all the time often with kind  of lurid disturbing imagery and slogans  right people who are raised in these  religions they're often blind to you  know just to blind to the evil  of religion that is right in front of  their face all the time and they're  blind to it because it's in front of  their face all the time  okay so sat 12 i don't know anything  about this guy you said this isn't  someone i've talked to in the past or  that i like i i'm not complaining but  there's some people in the audience here  where i really know them pretty well  somebody artist called sat12  says quote  a vegan world or a one with no religion  is a pipe dream at this time  i don't know how old you are  what are you going to do  with the next 20 years of your life  we're not talking about pipe dreams  we're talking about practical strategies  are you going to resign yourself to  putting your own son or your own  daughter into a christian school are you  going to resign yourself to sending your  own son or your own daughter to a  christian summer camp i knew one atheist  family that did that when i was in  school again i found it incredibly  disturbing for me i was a small child  but i really reflected on what it meant  to be atheist and reject the church when  my my friend jake was sent off to this i  think it was a mennonite camp it was  [ __ ] men and i was like jesus christ  his parents were atheists or nominally  atheists they identified as atheists and  sent their kid to this [ __ ] religious  summer camp you know you know  so sat 12  my point here is not that you're wrong  my point is that you're asking the wrong  question  the question is  what are we going to do next what are we  going to do now what's going to be  accomplished in the next five years 10  years 20 years all right  and to have the attitude that atheism  isn't worth fighting for  because some kind of idealized utopian  end goal is unachievable it's irrelevant  categorically it's the wrong category  thinking no a great example i can come  back to with disneyland okay  in the year 1965  pm would disneyland have made more money  or less money if they had embraced  christianity and become an overtly  pro-christian  children's entertainment company  they made the hard commitment and they  stuck to it  that that disney corporation all their  movies and all their theme parks would  have no religion whatsoever so it's not  anti-religious all right but you may  have never thought of this before the  movie bambi  the movie snow white and the seven  dwarves already at that stage they had  made a commitment they were not going to  have any christian morals okay and they  have these crappy like historical  recreation villages they're called like  america town or america villa and [ __ ]  they have these different neighborhoods  never is there a church in it okay they  could make a lot of money  doing christian weddings christian  funerals whatever they have christian  services at disneyland it could make a  lot of money and back in 1965 think  about how religious americans were think  about how many people would have shelled  out money for the equivalent to bambi  with an explicit christian parable  an explicit christian moral of the story  okay  being resigned to  and conforming to  christian culture is the wrong decision  rebelling against it challenging it  producing a new culture to replace it is  the right decision and it's irrelevant  to say that we can never live in a world  with zero percent  religion okay that's the wrong answer to  the wrong question okay  we can never live in a world with zero  tooth decay  get out there and fight to convince  people to brush their teeth  right it's worth fighting for we can  never live in a world with zero drunk  driving  get out there and fight  to get people to commit consciously to  never  driving drunk really brief story uh i  think i've never told this on youtube  before but if i have apologies i met  this woman um  [Music]  i met and talked with a woman for a  couple of hours and she was still  dealing with the death of her co-worker  she had a male colleague she was all  real messed up about it  and she said that she personally had  said to him so many times  why would you risk your life  riding your motorcycle drunk like when  you're going home from the nightclub or  the bar when you can just call a taxi  cab and i forget she said the tax taxi  cab will only cost you 15 whatever  number she said you know like this is a  life like why would you do this and the  guy always said nah it's no big deal i  don't know if she said that to him three  times or i doubt she said it to him a  hundred times but she is allegedly this  is something she'd actually said to him  directly again and again and one day he  got on his motorbike went home from the  pub and now he's dead  he was killed instantly in a traffic  accident that was attributable to his  drunkenness to his state of  inebriation or  or distraction  there will  never be  zero  drunk driving accidents  if you love someone  if you care about someone if you respect  someone  intellectually  fight  fight to save their [ __ ] life  fight  to convince them  that a meaningful life  requires  sobriety  like it doesn't just require that you  refuse to drink and drive requires that  you end your drinking absolutely  fight  because otherwise if you don't they may  not be here five years from now all  right they may be taken off the census  yeah  we're dealing with  life and death decisions  and of the people who are still going to  be alive  five years from now right a lot of them  are going to be locked into a  meaningless life a lot of them are going  to be frankly zombies on this earth it  happens with religion it happens with  drugs it happens with alcohol you can  live a long life but one that's  meaningless and where the damage does  done is such that they're they're never  coming back from that you know  so  in this sense okay  if you tell me  a vegan world is a pipe dream if you  tell me  a world with absolutely no religion  is a pipe dream all right a world  without  drunk driving is a pipe dream  okay  but that is a completely fallacious  reason  to give up on the struggle  even at the smallest scale of just two  people face to face  right  of bringing people over to your model of  a meaningful life which may involve  sobriety it may involve veganism it may  involve atheism we're presuming all  three right to bring that one person  over to your way of thinking to give  them so that they live rather than die  and so they have a meaningful life  rather than a meaningless life that's  worth fighting for just for your one  work colleague just for your one brother  your one sister your one son your one  daughter and it's worth fighting for at  the larger scale of a salon of 10 or 15  people it's worth fighting for at the  level of a neighborhood of a small  society of a few hundred a few thousand  people and it's worth fighting for at  the level of of millions  you know  so it's interesting you know  i i'm sorry but stat 12 you've basically  convinced me that you're an imbecile  it's i'm i don't know how it was  possible for you to have such a shallow  and stupid  uh response to this i took the time to  to reply to that in depth but i mean  this is the kind of thing as um  as  as  members of many religions say you know  them that have ears to hear let them  hear i mean i can only do what i can do  and there will be someone in the  audience who understands and appreciates  the answer i gave to that question  and it's sad twelve it's not going to be  you  but i hope somebody can take that and  get motivated you know to make a  difference  [Music]  and look you know i do think one of the  ways in which the world has changed the  21st century is  so many of us  don't know people face to face we know  people primarily or entirely over the  internet  or through messages on mobile phones  you may not know what it's like  viscerally  to care about someone and respect  someone and see intellectual potential  in them and in some sense to love them  like appreciate them i don't mean  romantic love here but like you got love  for somebody  but they're a drunk  you know but they get drunk every  weekend let's say they were two day a  week drunk they're sober five days a  week  but they're risking their life drunk  driving but they have these flaws you  know  and they have that intellectual  potential now like you think they're  smart you think they have redeeming  qualities  if they keep on drinking this way  you know they may not have that  intellectual potential for long yeah  maybe because they die but more likely  they just get themselves deep enough  into that life as a drug addict as a  kind of brain dead person as someone  leaving a thoughtless stupid existence  that they can't come back that they  can't get out of it anymore  um  all right guys i was gonna crap off this  video i think it'll be another video for  another day reading out the whole of my  uh my poems about socrates but instead  i'll just describe it um i think it  doesn't quite suit the mood as we come  to the end of this you know  i wrote  a children's story book it's in verse  it's poetry but it's you know it's  poetry intended for kids it's not  pretentious grown-up poetry  i started writing stories about socrates  i started promoting this idea of sock  mess a  socrates centered  holiday to replace christmas because i  in my way i'm trying to do something  positive for the future of the culture  for the future of planet earth for the  future of my own neighborhood for the  future of my own family all right  i refuse to keep inculcating into the  next generation  these myths that i think are barbaric  and stupid and wrong  i refuse to inculcate into them  values and beliefs that you know  ultimately i think are dangerous  and harmful all right  i'm not going to keep reproducing the  infrastructure  of the christian church or judaism or  islam  neither in the palpable sense of the the  institution as it exists in terms of  buildings  nor in terms of the more intangible  elements  of that religious tradition  now  if you wanted to abolish slavery  you'd have to kill people  we don't talk about the leaders of slave  rebellions  we don't talk about the abolitionists  as  killers all right  but they were  all right  and you would have to be an outcast  living under a false name  and a false  identity all right  in this really strange unexamined way  right we celebrate  the abolition of slavery we celebrate  you know the heroism of  particular black people who stood up for  civil rights inequality very carefully  selected examples  and we always want to remove the element  of violence  the element of risk  the element of sex self-sacrifice of  your of your life and what it does to  you  um  slavery  was brutal  i remember reading actually a christian  missionaries reflections on slavery he  was a christian missionary who crusaded  against slavery but at that time many  christians were pro-slavery as you can  imagine  i remember reading this guy's  reflections and he said  you know  as brutal as the slave masters were to  their slaves  if you didn't if you weren't alive at  that time in that place in that culture  what you can never realize  is that the slave masters themselves  were the most brutalized of all  he was saying just like the  psychological damage these guys carried  around with them  these were men  who had committed rape against female  slaves  from an early age they were men who'd  carried out torture against slaves of  various kinds you know torture to break  their will torture to force them to obey  they'd been whipping and stabbing people  i remember he described how  they always had guns and knives on their  person  they could never relax you could tell  who the slave owners were when they sat  down in a room  you know  like a bar or restaurant what have you  the way they sat ready to go and a lot  of them would feel uncomfortable they  want to have their knife out they'd have  a knife out on the table or they'd be  whittling something at the table they  were so strung up the way in which their  lives of violence you know shape their  shape their minds then of course you  know we think about those guys obviously  these are not the worst victims of the  slave system how do they treat their own  children how do they treat their own  wives  you know  the way in which slavery narrows the  mind  of the slave owner  and the way in which you know  these slave owners they slept in the  same house  under the same roof  with people they had tortured themselves  in the past people they had whipped  people that had placed in chains  you know  aware that some of these people living  in their own house  or living you know in a shed just behind  it that some of these people would if  they could take their revenge on the  same out they'd kill them in their sleep  you know  and uh there are examples from feudalism  in europe too where it's serfdom rather  than slavery that i've read i remember a  vivid description of one guy he was a  feudal estate owner so he had serfs not  slaves who at night would lock himself  in an iron cage  and um  his his mother was the only person who  had the key to the cage  and  there were descriptions of how this cage  was sort of elevated over a  gap in the floor in his own dungeon kind  of thing he was locking himself into a  dungeon that was probably built for  torturing and punishing his own serfs  and instead he was the one locking  himself in at night because he had so  many enemies some people would like to  kill them if they  if they got the chance  you know okay  slavery  brutalized the slaves  slavery brutalized the slave owners all  right the people  who rose up  to tear down the institution of slavery  they were brutalized in their turn  imagine what psychologically shattered  angry violent men they were  the people like not the storybook  version of the underground railroad  the people who had blood on their hands  from the underground railroad  you think they're a nice bunch of guys  like compared to cocaine smugglers think  about how tough these people are and the  way in which they had to live a lie  every day and have multiple identities  and so on right  think about how they slept at night  you know  what we're talking about here you know  in saying we have a challenge in front  of us  we have a challenge to overcome  christianity once and for all we have a  challenge to stop  compromising with christmas to stop  pretending that we can keep the same box  and put new contents inside to stop  pretending that we can keep celebrating  american thanksgiving you know and that  it's not going to represent genocide and  you would expect that of a family who  had been for several generation  communists in russia you say to them  look i'm sorry at some point you have to  stop worshiping joseph stalin i know you  might think this is harmless you might  think that these are traditions you've  carried on  you turn to a bunch of neo-nazis or  a continuous family of nazis and say  look at some point you have to stop  reviewing adolf hitler and it exists  you can google around and see it if you  want to that subculture really does  exist and no you can't just keep the box  and change what's inside the box you  have to  discard  you know this ideology this set of  beliefs entirely uh  yeah  it is it is a challenge  okay it's a challenge to ask yourself  how am i gonna raise my own daughter  without christmas carols how am i going  to raise my own daughter without reading  her the same story books that maybe 90  percent of her classmates  have read to her it's a challenge what  summer camp i'm going to send you how do  i join a gym  if the only gym in my town  is the ymca is a christian gym you know  again the jcc the jewish community  center it's a jewish competitive what  i'm saying  yeah you know what  starting your own gym  it's hard okay it's a challenge writing  your own story book making up your own  songs  you know  generating  something new  to challenge the culture that you've  inherited from your ancestors okay  it's hard  but there's nothing  brutal  about it  unlike the abolition of slavery unlike  the waves of violence and reprisal  unlike the waves of rebellion  and counter-rebellion revolution and  counter-revolution unlike  the internacing conflicts that have  taken place even within a protestant  christianity let alone protestant versus  catholic christianity let alone within  islam sunni versus shiite islam you know  can't we take a positive attitude  towards the fact that our struggle  our movement  is primarily creative rather than  destructive that we get to fundamentally  make our own lives better and make life  better just for our own sons just for  our own daughters maybe for a few of our  brothers and sisters our co-workers our  closest friends maybe we can bring some  of those people into  our orbit into this you know  but we're doing something that only  enriches our lives that only makes our  life better and then it's the potential  to make life better for a lot of other  people in the short term and in the long  term future of centuries to come it's  that kind of revolution  it's that kind of rebellion  instead of taking on  the lonesome violent path  of living in a slave society  and fighting for the abolition of  slavery  but step one is  that we just have to admit to ourselves  as individuals and as a movement  that what we are fighting for is  the abolition of the christian faith